.TH ICARUS 7 "2026-07-02" "Icarus OS" "Icarus Manual"
.SH NAME
Icarus \- The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing OS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Icarus
is a custom-built Arch Linux derivative ruthlessly optimized for AI workloads on low-spec Intel hardware. It employs a hand-compiled, mitigation-free kernel, unified memory via Vulkan, a RAM-root filesystem for near-instant I/O, and a stealth terminal disguise.
.SH ARCHITECTURE
.TP
.BR linux-icarus
A stripped-down kernel featuring no security mitigations, full preemption, a 1000Hz tick rate, and native Intel i915 GPU support.
.TP
.B RAM-root & Btrfs Snapshots
The root filesystem is copied into a tmpfs at boot for near-instant response. Persistent data is maintained via Btrfs subvolumes with automated hourly snapshots via Snapper.
.TP
.B Vulkan UMA Engine
A zero-copy GPU compute pipeline leveraging Vulkan storage buffers mapped directly to NumPy arrays. It utilizes custom compute shaders for Matrix Multiplication, Attention Scores, Softmax, LayerNorm, and GELU.
.TP
.B Rust Kernel Module
The experimental \fIicarus_rust\fR module provides safe system-level observability and procfs interfaces (e.g., /proc/icarus).
.SH SYSTEM DAEMONS
The following daemons manage the lifecycle and performance of the OS:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR icarus-sentinel (8)
Thermal and memory guardian. Monitors CPU/GPU temperatures and proactively triggers memory compaction before OOM conditions occur.
.TP
.BR icarus-tune (8)
Dynamically adjusts CPU governors and GPU frequencies based on system load.
.TP
.BR icarus-memtierd (8)
Manages memory tiering, migrating pages between Hot (RAM), Warm (zram), and Cold (SSD Swap) storage based on usage thresholds.
.TP
.BR icarus-stealth (8)
A decoy 4.4BSD Unix terminal utilizing fbterm to conceal the graphical desktop. Can be bypassed via Ctrl+Alt+F12.
.TP
.BR icarus-exporter (8)
Exposes Prometheus-compatible system metrics (temperature, memory, zram) on port 9100.
.TP
.BR icarus-grimoire-keeper (8)
Automated hourly Git commits of all configuration drift to the main repository.
.RE
.SH ESSENTIAL COMMANDS
.TP
.B icarus-master.sh \fI/dev/sdX\fR
The irreversible master assembly script. Automates partitioning, bootstrapping, kernel compilation, and service deployment.
.TP
.B probe-hardware.sh
Generates a highly specific kernel configuration fragment tailored to the exact CPU topology and GPU architecture of the host.
.TP
.B icarus-backup.sh \fI/dev/sdX1\fR
Creates an AES256-encrypted tarball of the persistent Btrfs overlay.
.TP
.B run-tests.sh
Executes the comprehensive Icarus test suite, validating RAM-root integrity, Vulkan UMA buffers, thermal throttling, and zram configurations.
.TP
.B bench-all.sh
Triggers eBPF-based benchmarks (\fBgpu_alloc.bt\fR, \fBvulkan_cmd.bt\fR, \fBmem_pressure.bt\fR) to trace latency and memory pressure.
.SH DIRECTORY STRUCTURE
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/
Contains all primary Icarus shell scripts and utilities.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/
Holds the custom systemd services and timers driving the Icarus ecosystem.
.TP
.I /home/icarus/icarus-linux/
The master repository and source of truth containing kernel configs, initramfs hooks, dotfiles, Vulkan shaders, and eBPF traces.
.SH AUTOMATION & CI
.B Icarus
integrates deeply with GitHub Actions. Pushing a version tag via \fBmake release\fR triggers the \fBmonthly-release.yml\fR workflow, which automatically compiles the kernel, generates a bootable ISO using \fBarchiso\fR, and attaches it as a GitHub release artifact.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR i3 (1),
.BR picom (1),
.BR polybar (1),
.BR bpf (2),
.BR vulkan (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Forged by The Icarus Project